CDSEIS is an interactive program for reading seismic data from SEED volumes and
writing to SAC or AH (ah or asc) files.  (It was originally written to extract
data from GDSN CD-ROMs, but expanded to work with SEED-oriented datasets.)
Unlike other SEED-reading tools, the files that it outputs are event oriented,
cut around the arrival times of specific (user-tailored) phases, and named
using event-specific names.  The files have event and station information
populating the header information for the files.  The result is a collection of
traces that is immediately available for analysis.

CDSEIS first reads an ascii index catalog created for each SEED volume (or CD)
made by MAKELOG.  The logs summarize the waveform start and stop times 
and associates each waveform with an event.  The user specifies various search 
parameters to identify the desired seismograms.  Once the desired time series
are identified, they can then be read directly from the SEED volume or CD.
The use of an index file results in greatly increased speed compared to
searching through the entire SEED volume or CD to find the desired time series.

In extracting data with CDSEIS, a command language (similar to PLOTXY, etc.) 
is used with defaults defined for most of the parameters so that a minimum 
of user inputs are required.  The basic idea is to define a number of 
search parameters which are used to select which seismograms to 
read.  The program can be run in batch mode by constructing a file of 
input parameters and redirecting standard input from that file. 

CDSEIS was written by Peter Shearer (1989) to run on a Macintosh.  
Ken Creager added several options and modified the code to run in a 
UNIX environment.  Tom McSweeney wrote the routine write_ah.c. 
Doug Wiens wrote an early version of the instrument response 
reader.  George Helffrich added SAC output and implemented reading
of SEED volumes, and is responsible for continued maintenance of
CDSEIS.
Please report bugs, suggestions, and comments to G. Helffrich.

HOW TO BUILD IT

cd src                        ## go to the source code directory
:                             ## <look at and edit the Makefile>
make                          ## make cdseis, makelog, make_tt
install cdseis /usr/local/bin ## install in binary directory of choice

Put the man page (cdseis.man) in /usr/man/manl/cdseis.1
Print the documentation to the screen or a hardcopy device by:
   tbl cdseis.man | nroff -man | col | more
or man cdseis    
or tbl cdseis.man | groff -man
or groff -man -t cdseis.man > cdseis.ps
and view cdseis.ps with your favorite PostScript reader.

You may wish to change the default values of some of the 
parameters to suit your particular needs.  They are all set in data 
statements in the main program (cdseis.f).  In particular, the default 
directories for the phase files, and catalog files, and the cdroms, which
are in variables phsdir, logdir, and cddir should be changed. Also change 
the variable named 'byteswap' as described in the last paragraph below.

There are four programs in the src directory: (CONVERTLOG is
no longer useful; MAKELOG, MAKE_TT and CDSEIS are, however)

1) MAKELOG (current; in a separate repository called "makelog") reads a list
of SEED volumes and makes an ASCII log file of all waveform start and stop
times, associating each waveform with an event.  The event list is either taken
from the SEED volume itself (if it contains one), or from an external catalog
provided to the program.  Possible catalog formats are the Global CMT .ndk
format or a file with one entry per line (see program for format details).

Originally, MAKELOG read an entire cdrom and made an ASCII log file of 
all waveform start and stop times, associating each waveform with 
an event.  On a SUN sparcstation this took about 1-2 hours for each 
cdrom.  This program also read all the station corrections and instrument
response poles and zeros, and reports errors and warnings to standard
output when it does not recognize the format.  CONVERTLOG essentially tidied
up the output from this program.  (MAKELOG is here for historical completeness.)

2) CONVERTLOG reads a cdrom log created by MAKELOG, removes trailing 
blanks to reduce the file size, and assigns a unique event designation 
to each event.  (CONVERTLOG is also here for historical completeness.)

3) CDSEIS reads the modified log created by MAKELOG, accepts a 
variety of search parameters in an interactive mode, and either 
creates a list of available waveforms (without reading data) or 
retrieves requested waveforms from the SEED volume (or a CD).  

4) MAKE_TT makes up a set of approximate phase travel time tables from the
Kennett and Buland tau-p routines.  CDSEIS uses these tables to calculate
expected arrival times for extracting data around major phase arrivals.
The routine uses the subroutine interface to tau-p; you need to have a
working version of it to compile this program.

The programs can be compiled by typing: make all  

You may have to change the Makefile in order to find the directory on
your machine that contains the SAC programs.  If you do not have SAC on 
your machine and are not interested in SAC file output, comment out the 
calls to write_sac in datout.f and remove references to SAC from the 
Makefile.  All needed AH routines are included in cdseis.

Some example (approximate) travel time curves are given in files 
beginning with tt_ .

Logs created by MAKELOG and CONVERTLOG for almost all CDs that were ever
distributed by seismological agencies are supplied in the files log*.  You
only need to use these programs to create new logs for new SEED volumes or,
heaven forbid, new CDs.  MAKELOG is now fairly robust in dealing with SEED
volumes.  In the past, MAKELOG had to be modified for just about every new CD.
While it is now unlikely to fail, it is possible that MAKELOG could crash on a
subsequent SEED volume because of some peculiarity associated with new data.
After running MAKELOG always check the log file, makelog.log, for errors and
warnings.

The first CD put out by the NEIC was distributed with integer bytes in the
order that is standard for DEC computers and has the number 5033 stamped on the 
front of the disk.  It was also distributed using the UNIX convention and has
the number 5054 stamped on the front.  As far as I can tell these are identical
except for the order of the bytes in each integer.  The log file 'log5033' works
for either disk.  All subsequet CD's use the UNIX convention.  CDSEIS reads
5054 correctly if the variable 'byteswap' in the main program is set to
'.false.' and will read 5033 properly if 'byteswap' is set to '.true.'.

example: 
cdseis
dmin 85 8 28 0 0
dmax 85 8 28 23 59
logf log5461
srat 2 16
phas tt_p
wind -2 20
file ev ch
otyp ah
wtyp a
stat
comp 5
read
comp 6
read
comp 7
read
quit

This gives 3 files for vertical, north and east components of intermediate-
period seismograms from a deep-focus earthquake. The vertical
component seismograms can be displayed using 'rsx *.ihz' if you have the
AH software running. Make sure CDROM 5461 is mounted at the directory
/cdrom. You can get a list of the seismograms by replacing 'read'
by 'scan'.


CHANGES AND BUG FIXES IN CDSEIS 2.0

1)  The time corrections were given, improperly, as either the first or last
    time correction in the station log.  It now properly interpolates the 
    given time corrections to the time of the first sample in the seismogram.
2)  Fix bug where gain is returned incorrectly if 3 component SP data is 
    followed by LP.
3)  ##Data output in AH format now has gain reported in counts/meter, instead
    of counts/micrometer.##
4)  Cdseis now reads the band (short-period, long-period, etc.) from the 
    station log, and puts this in the filename if requested.  The channel
    name in the headers is converted to SEED format (eg LHZ for long-period
    high gain, vertical).  Channel used to be called VERT for vertical.
5)  SCAN will output a subset of the log file in the log-file format.
6)  Add COMM, * commands for comments in input files.
7)  Make STAT output prettier, align.
8)  Comment out some debugging code that was left active. It printed stuff on
    range/midpoint searches.
9)  New station codes.  Made changes to SROSTA2 and stalist.  In the present
    version, this code isn't used, but one of these may form the basis of the
    subroutine that Peter Shearer was asking for.  Instead, the station log is
    parsed to obtain the station names, locations and data format information
    on the CD being processed.  I'm somewhat chary of the instrument locations
    in this list simply because a lot of it is typed in by hand and there is
    a potential of screwing up the locations (thus the ckstainfo program).
    I checked the ones I added, but not the original ones.
10) Fix bug on EOF -- causes infinite loop.  Proper command is QUIT not STOP.
11) Moved nonblank length and file name subroutines into cdsubs.f -- used by
    write_sac.f
12) Omit blank first output line in CONVERTLOG.
13) Change julian date handling to eliminate 1995 restriction.
14) Obtain station info from the data log when the data is being retrieved.
    This change was needed because on some CDs the same station has different
    GDSN ID numbers, and the same GDSN ID number refers to different stations
    on different CDs.
15) OTYP=10 added and set to default:  Get any available orientations.
    If OTYPE=5 during a search, all traces (both
    horizontals & verticals) are listed.  If doing a READ, only the vertical
    component is extracted.  Thus, you can't match up a SCAN listing with the
    result of a READ if OTYPE=5.  Adding OTYPE=10 lets you see and ask for any 
    data during either READ and SCAN, and lets you get *only* vertical component
    data if OTYPE=5.  In other words, what you see is what you get whether
    you SCAN or READ.
16) Fix zero division bug if you extract data that is flatlined at zero.
17) Decode new data formats:  1) Grafenberg; 2) Echery; 3) GEOSCOPE 24-bit.
18) Make MAKELIST terminate gracefully if an EOF is given.
19) Make MAKELIST dump out a list of stations and locations encountered on
    the CD processed to the output file.
20) Name the new CDs depending on range of data.
21) SAC output format.
22) Poles and zeroes output in SAC format.
23) Comments are read from cdrom and passed to output files
24) Able to extract from SEED volumes
25) Station elevation and event magnitude in SAC output
26) Make CDSEIS exit gracefully if EOF on input given.
27) Fix pole-zero response information parsing and output.
28) Add network and instrument type to station type information.
29) Improve handling of time-dependent channel descriptions (bug fix).
30) Handle new seed data block types (M, Q, etc.)
31) Make g77 & gfortran compatible.
32) Put network name and LOCID into SAC output files


WISHLIST
- Change log file format to recognize that different LOCIDs with the same
  sample rate may be present at one station.  At present, if different LOCIDs
  have the same sample rate, they can't all be listed in the log file.  (The
  "seed" designator should also be changed at the same time to an identifier
  that takes up less space.)
- Change SAC output so that freq-amp-phase response information may be written
  out in SAC's FAP file format.
- Change output from SEED volumes so that EVALRESP response output may be
  produced for full response information.

Keep wishing for no bugs in the code.
